The advance of this new form for surface microscopy was impeded by four instrumental problems: (1) the isolation of the experiment from the natural vibrations that are present in every laboratory, (2) the approach of the probe tip to the sample surface, (3) the scanning of the probe across the sample surface, and (4) the sharpening of the tip. The techniques that Binnig and Rohrer employed to solve these problems are elegant and straightforward and are briefly described here. Their solutions are used almost unaltered to the present time.

The sample and the scanning probe are protected from vibrations by being placed on a stage that is suspended from springs within another section or stage. This outer stage is in turn suspended from springs within a stainless steel frame. The structure is equipped with magnets and copper plates that will, if necessary, induce eddy currents that damp any motion of the stages. The placement and scanning movement of the probe are controlled by a tripod made of piezoelectric materials (which expand or contract when voltage is applied) and by a piezoelectric plate with three metal feet that can be fastened to a metal plate carrying the sample. Applying voltage to one leg of the tripod (or to the piezoelectric plate) causes the other tripod legs (or one or more of the metal feet) to move slightly. Both the direction and the magnitude of this movement can be precisely controlled. The probe is sharpened by applying a strong electric field; this dislodges the surface atoms of the tip until only a few (ideally, one) remain.

The scanning tunneling microscope is an electron microscope with a resolution sufficient to resolve single atoms. The sharp tip in the STM is similar to that in the scanning electron microscope, but the differences in the two instruments are profound. In the SEM, electrons are extracted from the tip with a series of positively charged plates placed a few centimetres downstream from the tip. The electrons at the apex of the tip are confined to the region within the metal by a potential barrier. The attractive force from the positive charge on the plates is sufficient to permit the electrons to overcome the barrier and enter the vacuum as free particles. The apertures in the downstream plates form an electron lens that converts the diverging beam from the tip into a beam converging to a focus on the surface of the sample.

In the STM, the setup is much simpler. The plates that form the lens in the SEM are removed, and the tip is positioned close to the sample. The electrons move through the barrier in a way that is similar to the motion of electrons in a metal. In metals, electrons appear to be freely moving particles, but this is illusory. In reality, the electrons move from atom to atom by tunneling through the potential barrier between two atomic sites. In a typical case, with the atoms spaced five angstroms apart, there is a finite probability that the electron will penetrate the barrier and move to the adjacent atom. The electrons are in motion around the nucleus, and they approach the barrier with a frequency of 1017 per second. For each approach to the barrier, the probability of tunneling is 10-4, and the electrons cross the barrier at the rate of 1013 per second. This high rate of transfer means that the motion is essentially continuous and tunneling can be ignored in metals.

Tunneling cannot be ignored in the STM; it is all-important. When the tip is moved close to the sample, the spacing between the tip and the surface is reduced to a value comparable to the spacing between neighbouring atoms in the lattice. In this circumstance, the tunneling electron can move either to the adjacent atoms in the lattice or to the atom on the tip of the probe. The tunneling current to the tip measures the density of electrons at the surface of the sample, and this information is displayed in the image. In semiconductors, such as silicon, the electron density reaches a maximum near the atomic sites. The density maxima appear as bright spots in the image, and these define the spatial distribution of atoms. In metals, on the other hand, the electronic charge is uniformly distributed over the entire surface. The tunneling current image should show a uniform background, but this is not the case. The interaction between tip and sample perturbs the electron density to the extent that the tunneling current is slightly increased when the tip is positioned directly above a surface atom. The periodic array of atoms is clearly visible in the images of materials such as gold, platinum, silver, nickel, and copper.


Applications 
Several surfaces have been studied with the STM. The arrangement of individual atoms on the metal surfaces of gold, platinum, nickel, and copper have all been accurately documented. The absorption and diffusion of different species such as oxygen and the epitaxial growth of gold on gold, silver on gold, and nickel on gold also have been examined in detail.

The surfaces of silicon have been studied more extensively than those of any other material. The surfaces are prepared by being heated in vacuum to temperatures so high that the atoms there rearrange their positions in a process called “surface reconstruction.” The reconstruction of the silicon surface designated (111) has been studied in minute detail. Such a surface reconstructs into an intricate and complex pattern known as the “Takayanagi” 7 ´ 7 structure. The position, the chemical reactivity, and the electronic configuration of each atomic site on the 7 ´ 7 surface has been measured with the STM. The reconstruction of the silicon surface designated (100) is more simple. The surface atoms form pairs, or dimers, that fit into rows that extend across the entire silicon surface.

The initial stages in the formation of interfaces between silicon and metal layers have been the subject of numerous STM studies. The atomic structure of these modified surfaces has been catalogued for such metals as gallium, indium, aluminum, gold, and silver.

The internal structure and organized behaviour of molecules deposited on graphite and gold substrates are easily imaged in the STM. The study of alkane molecules and the molecules of liquid crystals constitutes much of the definitive work with the STM. Biological molecules are attracting attention, and definitive studies of these molecules should be forthcoming.

“Vacuum tunneling” of electrons from tip to sample can take place even though the environment in the region surrounding the tip is not a vacuum but is filled with molecules of gas or liquids. With a tip-sample spacing as small as five angstroms, there is little room for molecules—even though they may exist in the surrounding atmosphere. The STM can operate in ambient atmosphere as well as in high vacuum. Indeed, it has been operated in air, in water, in insulating fluids, and in the ionic solutions used in electrochemistry. It is much more convenient than ultrahigh-vacuum instruments. When a high-vacuum environment is employed, its purpose is not to improve the performance of the STM but rather to ensure the cleanliness of the sample surface.

The STM can be cooled to temperatures less than 4 K—the temperature of liquid helium. It can be heated above 500° C (973 K). The low temperature is used to investigate the properties of superconducting materials, while the high temperature is employed to study the rapid diffusion of atoms across the surface of metals and their corrosion.

The STM is used primarily for imaging, but there are many other modalities that have been explored. The strong electric field between tip and sample has been utilized to move atoms along the sample surface. It has been used to enhance the etching rates in various gases. In one instance, a voltage of four volts was applied; the field at the tip was strong enough to remove atoms from the tip and deposit them on the substrate. This procedure has been employed with a gold tip to fabricate small gold islands or clusters on the substrate with several hundred atoms of gold in each cluster. These so-called nanostructures are used to pattern the surface with a scale that is unprecedented.